# Part 2.1: Using Built-In ELNs
In NOMAD, you can structure and save your experimental data using Built-In ELN schemas
that resemble ELNs (Electronic Lab Notebooks).

This tutorial guides you through some of these schemas using an example from sintering.
We will learn how to use NOMAD's ExperimentELN, SampleELN, ProcessELN, and
MeasurementELN schemas to digitize a fictional experimental workflow.

> [!WARNING]
> Since this is a fictional example, the data is not to be trusted.

## Pre-requisites
We will work on the 
[NOMAD example oasis](https://nomad-lab.eu/prod/v1/oasis/gui/search/entries).
Make sure you have your NOMAD account ready to work on the example oasis.

## Create an Upload
The first step for uploading data to NOMAD is creating an "Upload", which will
contains your raw files along with the processed entries generated by NOMAD. Read more
about uploads 
[here](https://nomad-lab.eu/prod/v1/oasis/docs/reference/glossary.html#upload).

Follow these steps to create your upload.

<iframe src="https://scribehow.com/embed/Create_new_Upload_on_NOMAD_Lab_Oasis_Platform__8n74Ia2KRS6813lZJ9hmtA" width="80%" height="600" allowfullscreen frameborder="0"></iframe>

## Add the Experiment and steps involved
After you create an upload, we will create an entry using ExperimentELN. This will act
as a container for all the steps involved. For our example, these steps are sintering
(Process) and XRD (Measurement).

<iframe src="https://scribehow.com/embed/Create_Experiment_ELN_for_Sintering_Process__dWi9ZL2RS9mKJ1XPsL32XQ" width="80%" height="600" allowfullscreen frameborder="0"></iframe>

A graphical summary of our experiment is available in the `Overview > Workflow` section.

## Add the Sample and populate the Process step

Process ELN entry can be found in the upload page. We will populate it with sintering
steps. But before we do that, we will create a sample ELN from within the Process ELN.

After creating the sample and referencing it inside the Process ELN, we will populate
the sample ELN. You can specify the elemental compositions and components of the sample.
If the component is a recognized pure substance, you can use `PureSubstanceComponent`
section to automatically access PubChem database and populate certain quantities in the
ELN.

Once the sample is populated, we will go back to the Process ELN and add two process
steps: heating and cooling. For each of the steps, we will add the temperature range
as the `comment`.

<iframe src="https://scribehow.com/embed/Populate_Process_ELN_and_create_Sample_ELN__As9sadvhS4a979Cd7rOPyA" width="80%" height="600" allowfullscreen frameborder="0"></iframe>

## Populate the Measurement results
We will go into the measurement ELN on the upload page and add XRD data. We will use the
`RichTextField` under `results` sub-section to add results. In our example, this will be
an image of the XRD pattern. 

We will also reference the sample created in the previous exercise. This ensures that
the sematic connections are present: sample is linked with both measurement and process. 

<iframe src="https://scribehow.com/embed/Populating_ELN_Measurement__P21WfffiSZaRVTYpcjaVXQ" width="80%" height="600" allowfullscreen frameborder="0"></iframe>

# Part 2.2: Customization of the ELNs
The built-in ELNs are general schemas. They can be used for myriad types of processes
and measurements. Owing to their simplicity, however, they can be limiting in case of
specific schema requirements.

Luckily, NOMAD provides two ways of adding technique-specific behavior to the ELNs.

- YAML schemas - config file containing schemas added to the upload
- Plugins - Python package added as an extension to NOMAD

Using our sintering example, we will show how to specialize the process ELN with a YAML
schema. We also show how to use a pre-implemented plugin to create an XRD specific 
measurement ELN.

## YAML schema
We will use a custom YAML schema to define `TemperatureRamp` section which inherits
`ProcessStep` basesection and adds two new quantities: `Initial Temperature` and 
`Final Temperature`. We also define `Sintering` section which uses `TemperatureRamp` to
define its steps.

This leads to an improvement over the generic Process ELN we used in the previous
exercise, because now you can define the temperature range for heating and cooling steps
in a structured way, rather than putting this information as the `comment`.

You can learn how to create your own YAML schemas in our 
[previous tutorial](https://youtu.be/5VXGZNlz9rc?feature=shared).

<iframe src="https://scribehow.com/embed/Create_Custom_Sintering_Process_Schema___uGkfGM-SziDbaiu9Ojpyg" width="80%" height="600" allowfullscreen frameborder="0"></iframe>

## XRD Plugin
Plugins provide high degree of control on the behavior of ELNs based on custom Python
code. We can use this feature to define the automatization behind the ELNs. For example,
files dropped in the upload can be automatically parsed. Further, the parsed data and 
metadata can be used to populate the ELNs.

We will use one such plugin developed for XRD measurement. It allows you to import the
measurement data directly from a measurement file (coming from the instrument) into an
ELN entry. Further, it automatically generates XRD pattern plots based on the data.

<iframe src="https://scribehow.com/embed/Create_XRD_Measurement_ELN_entry_using_plugin__CaFgPhKwTju8hjrSop9Vrg" width="80%" height="600" allowfullscreen frameborder="0"></iframe>